# Introduction

The final unessay was a project not without wins and fails. But as I have learned in previous classes such as HIST 3000 and HIST 3814, it's in failing gloriously that we win. It's the 'fails' that teach us the most valuable lessons, and it's those that make us better historians and people in general. Game production is difficult, and even more so with inexperienced developers/historians. However, through the bumps in the road, we've managed to produce a "thing" that we made ourselves trying to play with history!

## Fail

I think the biggest 'fail' of this project was the lack of coordination between team members while trying to assemble and develop a historical game using Minecraft. While we were all on the same page to use Minecraft as the nexus of our historical narrative, it took a long time figuring out exactly why we were using Minecraft and how we would use it, beyond just building for the sake of building. Some group members left and some came so our foundation was hardly set in stone. This taught me that foundation in big projects like these, especially with group projects, is critical and indispensable. What we should have done then was work on our core game elements as soon as possible, figuring out our design pillars and the goal of the game before anything else. In doing so, we can pave the pillars of our progress road and simply build on it rather than changing the core all the time. It was also difficult to properly collaborate as we all had different schedules that sometimes made meetings hard to arrange. 

## Win

I believe my win for this project is my success in playfully engaging with the piece of history we were interacting with. Instead of just building for the sake of building, which I will admit, was my first thought, I actively tried to question why I was building what I was building and what it would mean for the player viewing it. 

While building a monument, I try to constantly engage with the building by interacting with primary sources such as floor plans and images. By doing so, I immerse myself into how it was built, the reason behind certain design decisions, and what the building meant in its urban space. It allows me to gain a better understanding making it easier for me to see cultural links with another building I will build. As I have learned through my program of History and Theory of Architecture, a building is never isolated from its social implications. How the people around interact with the people is what defines a building's characteristic and place in its urban setting. I could go on and on about the implication of a building with its surrounding, but I will cut it there for fear of confusing and digressing.

As for how the player views it, the building should be inviting and interactable. When I built my Notre Dame de Paris a few years ago (and repurposed it for this project), I built it with the idea of letting players explore it in mind. I did not want it to be an enclosed space where they couldn't get inside, I wanted them to explicitly explore every crumb to get a better sense of what they were looking at. By making sure that the player can appropriately engage with the monument while building it, I am promoting playful historical engagement for both the player and I.  

## Conclusive Thoughts on the Whole Project

This unessay has been all about playing with history and ways of engaging with it. I don't believe there are wrong ways to play with history, but perhaps there are definitely 'less right' ways to do it. An important distinction is that when playing with history, you must make sure that you are not simply toying with it. I believe building for the sake of building is toying with history, but when we add a player agent and a museum gameworld, we are starting to think more critically about the implication of that building on the larger historical dimension. 

Also just as important, we must consider the ethics of how we play with history. What does it mean when I am removing the player's ability to break blocks of the building? Some could say that I am controlling that player's action and that it is unethical, but I would argue, in the context of my unessay, that this emphasize the importance of preservation. However, it would be equally interesting to see what would happen if I gave the player the ability to destroy whatever it wants, to build whatever it wants. Am I giving that player the ability to rewrite its own history? I think that it ultimately depends on the player's intention. Maybe for the player, building and destroying buildings is a more engaging way of playing with history then simply immersing oneself in a virtual museum. On the other hand, if that player had planned ambitions, it could try to push their own (potentially radical) narratives into the world. These 'what if?' questions are numerous enough to entertain an historian for centuries!

Therefore, when I am talking about playful history, I am not talking about only one definitive way to do it. With my unessay, I am only showing one way that could maybe work for some, and not so much for others. I am not trying to claim that one way is superior above another, but that playing with history is just that - subjective. 

At the end of the day, I share the same sentiment as Shafik when he states that with the unessay, he felt that there needed to be more involvement, that it felt like something was missing. We are just beginning to scratch the surface of what it means to playfully engage with history; therefore, it is not yet evident when some more obscure historical implications are missing from the final product. If I was to redo an unessay, I think I would try to reach out to members outside the project group to garner different perspectives. As I said, playful history is subjective in a sense, so everyone has a way of engaging that is more meaningful. So, if they can’t engage with the unessay, something needs to change. There is a reason why big game studios hire an extensive list of dedicated testers for new games; they see things that are blinded to us.

I would like to conclude this small reflection by reflecting on the process of the unessay throughout the class. When it was first introduced, the concept of the unessay confused me quite a bit, but I was unable to explain why I was confused. Maybe I did not understand the guidelines enough. It only started making sense in December, but by that time, there was not enough time to submit a project that would reflect the entire intent of the unessay. I am aware that the unessay is only meant to be a proof of concept, a rough sketch of what the game - or any type of engagement - would have looked like, but it's difficult to submit something that has so many rough edges that it can distract the larger goal and objective of the project. I also realize this is partly my fault for not asking the questions, but I would argue that it is difficult to ask questions when you don't know what questions to ask. Despite the inital confusion with the nature of the project, this was still one of the most interesting project I have done this semester. Rarely do I get the chance to so thoroughly engage with course content, much less using a video game! It's the step in how to use that video games that is a challenge to tackle. 