---
interstitial: Interstitial 1
date: {{2022-10-09}}
tags: Storytelling, thinking, authenticity
---

# Introduction 
*What does it mean to be **playful?*** What does it implicate when we are saying: **"playful engagement with the past?"** Honestly, *I'm still not sure*, but I going to try and get a better understanding by the end of the semester. For now, I can only tell you that it is not quite what I thought it was before coming to this class. I had an idea what playful engagement could be, but I was not conscious enough of its *implication in the process* of creating an historical narrative. For example, I am a big fan of games and maybe even arguably an advocate for games as a storytelling medium, but Meghna Jayanth's [article](https://medium.com/@betterthemask/white-protagonism-and-imperial-pleasures-in-game-design-digra21-a4bdb3f5583c)[^1] made me reconsider how we do games and play them. The article referenced games being based on the white protagonist and being a product of imperialist desire, and as such the storytelling references this social construct giving the playful engagement a different kind of flavour. With this in mind,  I believe that the **main message** of this module was "the behind of the scene" of storytelling, the hidden implications that we may not realize, how storytelling is engaging with the players, and the authenticity of the message versus it's accuracy. 

Throughout the module, we've focused on storytelling through different medium and it's content. The first week introduced us to the argument of **authenticity versus accuracy** which was already revisited by Dany Guay-Belanger. Can a story made with false facts but conserving the true facts' authenticity enhance engagement compared to true facts presented in a monotnomous accuracy? T. Mills Kelly hints at the fact that authenticity is more valuable when trying to playfully engage with the past. In the article, [*True Facts or False Facts - Which Are More Authentic?*](https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv65swr0.19#metadata_info_tab_contents),  the author claims that the hoax stories they had created gained a lot of traction on the Internet: "His story exploded across the Internet, becoming the most viewed article on the website of The Atlantic that month, and appearing in different versions on various tech blogs such as BoingBoing and TechCrunch, and on various discussion forums such as Mashable."[^2] Although the student was using false facts, the authencity of the historical engagement is what attracted people to it. Thus, it made be realize engaging with the past does not need to be 100% accurate as long as the storytelling is authentic and pushes the right message. But then, what is the right message you might ask? Unfortunatly, that's what I am still trying to figure out. The question of what is right and what is wrong is eternally unanswerable because people will always struggle to leave their bias behind. These are questions and implications that may not keep me awake at night, but they sure linger on my mind when they resurface. Belanger's vision of game being an assemblage of articulation helps me identify storytelling in games in that it shows me that storytelling is not linear and that the different articulation each tells a certain story. There are no rights or wrongs, but only articulations with each a purpose. This assemblage can guide storytelling in games to be more authentic when they are conscious of the articulation and their implication. 

Another aspect of game design that needs to be carefully noted is how they communicate the past. I do not remember in which class I heard it, but *"we do not learn about history and the past, we learn about historians' perspectives on the past, because we can never know the true past."* **Jeremiah McCall** claims a similar arguments with the way game designers communicate their understanding of the past: 

>"Historical games, accurate or loose, exclusive or inclusive, problematic or purposeful are history. They communicate their designers' understandings of the past, not only in terms of what the designers think about the past, but also in terms of what they think is important to know, engage, and remember."[^3] 

The same principle applies here. Are we playing games about the past, or games about the past viewed through the designers? This is a problematic question that troubles me when I'm trying to come up with unessay ideas. How do I communicate the past without limiting the past through my perspective? I am a straight white male, so there are prejudices that I am not a victim of, and such historical context that may not appear obvious or alarming to me. So, I will either have to accept that either no history can be learned and played with that is not altered and appropriated, or that history as a discipline itself is flawed for such unbiased engagement. It's definitely something that I will have to keep in mind while engaging with my unessay. 

### Engagement with the past

When I first joined this class, **I thought I knew history**, how we learn about it, how we could learn about it, but I was quickly proven wrong. In my opinion, the most surprising thing about this module that has changed how I think about how I 'do' history is the argument of authenticity versus accuracy. I've come to learn that doing history is not being 100% accurate about past events, but that it's engaging with it, be it using true facts, or made up facts based on true facts. Being somewhat of a self-diagnosed purist myself, it is very hard for me to branch out of trueness accuracy when it comes to creating or engaging with something. For example, when playing a game, I have to play it like the creators want me to or otherwise I feel like I am not properly engaging with it. That means that I have a difficulty modifying the games with mods and extra ephemera, since the experience they offer differ too much from the original, vanilla experience. As such, when doing history, I have to learn to branch out from what is, and go towards what could be. I loved how in first class we were creating these "what if" scenarios about historical figures, trying to find out who was a vampire, and who was not. This opened my eyes to have we do history. If we want to understand the event that happened, we have to explore what did not happen and what would happen if it did. This gives us a better contextual look at history, it gives us the opportunity to be playful with how we study it.

Keeping this principle close at heart, for my unessay, it makes me want to not just recreate history as it is, but history as it could be, while meaningfully looking back at what is. For my unessay project, although the ideas and concept are not fully laid in stone, I know that I do not want to simply do history for the sake of doing history, but to explore it through different perspective. For example, since I am planning on doing a minecraft project, I can build anything in this world. With this opportunity, I can take buildings and structures, and arrange it in all kind of ways, playfully engaging with its cultural, socio-economic historical context, while playing with a totally new concept of 'that' history. 

## Challenges
While I am starting to understand the implications that comes with playfully engaging with the past through mediums like games and visual storytelling, the actual process of creating becomes intimidating. I have ideas that I want to push forward, but I struggle to find an **effective** way to go about it. What's the point if the idea is a 10/10 but the execution is a 1/10? I think playful history should have confidence in it to properly convey its narrative, so I'll try to be confident about the way I engage with the past. 

## Changes I'm making moving forward
I'm hoping that in the next few weeks, it will become clearer in mind as to how to proceed with the creation of my unessay. How can I create engagement with the player while remaining unbiased and not forcing any of my beliefs or prejudices on them? 

Also, I haven't used Obsidian nearly as much as I should (just taking notes, and noting down log stuff), so I want to try and find a way to organize my thoughts better with it. I am just unsure how to effectively use the graph viewer and properly linking thoughts without them becoming too convoluted and all over the place. 

## Relevant Log Files
You can find my log at: [Interstitial 1](https://github.com/MaxTheBeast300/hist3812-materials/blob/main/Interstitial1/log_Interstitial1.md.md)

[^1]: Jayanth, Meghna. 2021. White Protagonism and Imperial Pleasures in Game Design #DIGRA21 Keynote. [link](https://medium.com/@betterthemask/white-protagonism-and-imperial-pleasures-in-game-design-digra21-a4bdb3f5583c)
[^2]: Kelly, T. Mills. 2014. True Facts or False Facts - Which Are More Authentic? in K. Kee, ed. _Pastplay_. U Michigan Press. [Permalink](https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv65swr0.19).
[^3]: McCall, Jeremiah. 2019. Playing with the past: history and video games (and why it might matter) _Journal of Geek Studies_ [link](https://jgeekstudies.org/2019/04/22/playing-with-the-past-history-and-video-games-and-why-it-might-matter/)